Virtual frames. (#2)
stevenheidel/openqasm: source/language/openpulse.rst

OpenPulse Grammar
=================

> In addition to OpenQASM instructions, ``defcal`` blocks may contain OpenPulse

Reviewer: Might be nice to incorporate some of the intro paragraph from the signal proposal. It provides nice high level overview of how OpenPulse fits into OpenQASM. Here is that text:

```
OpenQASM allows users to provide the target system's implementation of quantum operations with
 ``defcal`` `blocks <pulses.rst>`_ . Calibration grammars are open to extension for system
 implementors. In this document, we outline one such grammar, OpenPulse, which maybe selected
 within a supporting compiler through the declaration `defcalgrammar "openpulse" <VERSION>`.
```

Author: Added.

instructions. Certain OpenPulse instructions are further restricted to only
appearing inside of a ``defcal`` block.

> These instructions are motivated by the original OpenPulse specification which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This grammar is motivated by the original OpenPulse specification which
```

Author: Re-wrote it take a large chunk of the `Signal` proposal introduction.

> was defined as a JSON wire-format for pulse-level quantum programs in the paper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
, a JSON wire-format for pulse-level quantum programs defined in the paper
```

Author: Fixed.

`Qiskit Backend Specifications for OpenQASM and OpenPulse Experiment

> <https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.03452>`_.

Reviewer: Should this be a citation? (In line w/ the other citations that were added)

Author: Added.

> The text format described here has several advantages over the equivalent JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The text format described here has several advantages over the original JSON
```

Author: Fixed.

format:

> - It is more readable

Reviewer: Additions to this list:

```
- Pulse timing is based on instruction ordering and works with programs containing branching control flow (may be the same as the absolute time bullet
- Reusable gate calibrations enable more succinct calibration descriptions.
- Richer ability to compose complex pulses through natural DSP-like operations.
- Clearly defined relationship between pulses, channels and the phases of compilation to hardware resources.
 - Use of multiple oscillators on a single channel at the same time (see :ref:`Geo Gate`)
 ```

Author: Fixed.

> - It is more readable

Reviewer: On the circuit instructions: can we note attachment of physical qubits (which allows microcoding of gate level ops).

Author: Added the intro from the signal proposal.

> - It is more readable

Reviewer: Following this list, can we add the following language (modified from signal proposal):

```
OpenPulse provides a flexible programming model that should extend to many quantum control schemes and hardware. At the core of the OpenPulse grammar are ``pulses``, ``channels`` and ``frames``. ``Pulses`` define a discrete set of samples (or parametric function) which are then played or captured on a ``frame`` on the target device. A ``frame`` is a software abstraction tying an oscillator to the underlying physical ``channel``. This allows 
the programmer to be agnostic to complexities of the device's underlying pulse generation hardware. It is the responsibility of the target device's compiler to map ``pulses`` on ``frames`` to the appropriate instruments in the target hardware.
```

Author: Added.

Channels are vendor-specific and device-specific. It is expected that vendors
of quantum hardware provide the appropriate channel names and qubit mappings
as configuration information to end users. Each channel may also have associated
static settings, such as local-oscillator frequencies, which do not vary
throughout program execution. Again it is expected that vendors of quantum
hardware provide a method for manipulating those static settings if appropriate.

There are two kinds of channels: transmit channels (sending input to a quantum
device) and receive channels (reading output from a quantum device).

Interacting with channels directly is onerous and makes the pulse programs less
portable. The OpenPulse defcalgrammar does not directly work with channels and
instead works with abstract "frames" of reference, described below. A channel
is only used to specify the physical resource on which to play a pulse.

Frames
------

When interacting with qubits, it turns out to be quite useful to keep track of a frame of reference,
akin to the rotating frame of a Hamiltonian, throughout the execution of a program. These ``frame``
types are responsible for two things

> - Tracking time appropriately so programs do not need to deal in absolute time

Reviewer 2: nor the bookkeeping of advancing time in a sequence of pulses

- Tracking phase by producing a complex value given an input time (i.e. via the mathematical
  relationship :math:`e^{i\left(2\pi f t + \theta\right)}`,  where `f` is frequency and

>   :math:`\theta` is phase). One motivation for keeping track of phase is to allow pulses to be be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :math:`\theta` is phase). One motivation for keeping track of phase is to allow pulses to be
```

When interacting with qubits, it turns out to be quite useful to keep track of a frame of reference,
akin to the rotating frame of a Hamiltonian, throughout the execution of a program. These ``frame``
types are responsible for two things

This has the advantage that one can run any program with any arbitrary frame
names provided a mapping to the appropriate channels is given.
- Tracking time appropriately so programs do not need to deal in absolute time
- Tracking phase by producing a complex value given an input time (i.e. via the mathematical
  relationship :math:`e^{i\left(2\pi f t + \theta\right)}`,  where `f` is frequency and
  :math:`\theta` is phase). One motivation for keeping track of phase is to allow pulses to be be
  defined in the rotating frame (i.e. without the carrier) with the effect being
  an equivalent application in the lab frame (i.e. with the carrier supplied by the ``frame``).
  Another motivation is to more naturally implement a "virtual Z-gate", which does not require a
  physical pulse but rather shifts the phase of all future pulses on that frame.

Restrictions on the use of frames
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The frame is composed of three parts:

> There are two important considersations when dealing with frames.

Reviewer: Minor, but should make the amplitude vs non amplitude consistent in the doc (sometimes two params are used, sometimes three)

Author: Not sure to which ambiguity you are referring.  Could you take a look at the most recent commit and see if I fixed it?

Reviewer 2: I was a bit lost on what the two or three parameters to the constructor were. Here we have `Frame(5e9, 0.0)` but below we have `Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0)` What about explicitly telling the reader what the arguments are and relating them back to the mathematical equation above:

```
Frames are purely virtual and can be constructed using the ``Frame`` command. E.g. 
frame driveframe1 = Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0);
would construct a frame with scale 1.0, frequency `f`  5 GHz and phase `\theta` 0.0.
```

Reviewer: `driveframe` has two input parameters to `Frame`. `driveframe1` below has 3 input parameters. I assume the 3rd parameter refers to an amplitude. We should be consistent on whether or not the `Frame` allows an amplitude to be specified.

Author: > What about explicitly telling the reader what the arguments are and relating them back to the mathematical equation above:

Added

> 

driveframe has two input parameters to Frame. driveframe1 below has 3 input parameters. I assume the 3rd parameter refers to an amplitude. We should be consistent on whether or not the Frame allows an amplitude to be specified.

Yes, that's a typo and just fixed. No `scale` in a `frame`.

> 3. A time of type ``dt`` which is manipulated implicitly and cannot be modified other

Reviewer: Perhaps `dt` should be a per channel concern?

>   frame driveframe1 = Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0);

Reviewer 3: Why capital? To differentiate the type and initializer?

Author: Yes; other suggestions welcome.

>   frame driveframe2 = copy(driveframe1, phase=driveframe1.phase + pi/2);

Reviewer 3: I would tend to lean away from named arguments as these are not currently part of OpenQASM. I know we are free to do whatever we want, but I would err on the side of consistency.

Author: Sounds fine by me. We can just set it after the copy.

> This will generate a ::math:`pi/2` phase incremented copy of ``driveframe1`` (i.e. with

Reviewer 3: Is this independent of the derived frame from this point forward?

Author: No; there are no dependencies between frames.

Reviewer 4: Took me a few seconds to parse, I think you mean "yes; there are no dependencies between frames"

Reviewer 2: The parenthetical "i.e. with the same frequency and time as driveframe1" might just make this more confusing. Just saying it's a copy might be enough.

Reviewer: Would it be beneficial to define the copied frame w/ no aggregated phase and initial time = 0? This seems to be the main reason to copy a `frame`. For instance, if you have already used the `frame` and want a fresh one to use on a new physical channel. If you wanted the same time, you could just keep using the original frame.

Author: > The parenthetical "i.e. with the same frequency and time as driveframe1" might just make this more confusing. Just saying it's a copy might be enough.

Fixed.

> Would it be beneficial to define the copied frame w/ no aggregated phase and initial time = 0? This seems to be the main reason to copy a frame. For instance, if you have already used the frame and want a fresh one to use on a new physical channel. If you wanted the same time, you could just keep using the original frame.

You can do that by initializing a new frame via the `Frame(freq, phase)` initialize. The copy is there for the explicit cases where you want to same time as same other frame.

Author: > The parenthetical "i.e. with the same frequency and time as driveframe1" might just make this more confusing. Just saying it's a copy might be enough.

Fixed.

> Would it be beneficial to define the copied frame w/ no aggregated phase and initial time = 0? This seems to be the main reason to copy a frame. For instance, if you have already used the frame and want a fresh one to use on a new physical channel. If you wanted the same time, you could just keep using the original frame.

You can do that by initializing a new frame via the `Frame(freq, phase)` initialize. The copy is there for the explicit cases where you want to same time as same other frame.

> Like other things in OpenQASM, a ``frame`` is locally scoped unless a ``prelude`` defcal is used

Reviewer 3: Agreed, we need to decide how to do scoping.

Reviewer 4: I wonder if we named it `global` that would make it more clear

Reviewer 3: Yes, that may be clearer. Possibly something like 

```
calconfig {

}
```

May make sense as well. A block scoped just for setup for a calibration grammar.

Author: Gave it a shot with `calconfig`.

> Like other things in OpenQASM, a ``frame`` is locally scoped unless a ``prelude`` defcal is used

Reviewer: I like this idea

>    defcal prelude {

Reviewer 3: I was wondering if we should consider getting qubit wildcarded attributes, this would allow more generic defcals that work for many qubits, eg., 

```c
defcal prelude {
     set_attr("frame",  Frame(5.0e9, 0)) $0;
}

defcal rz(angle[20] theta) $q {
     frame carrier = get_attr("frame") $q;
     carrier.phase -= theta;
}

Author: Took a shot at it.

>      map[int, frame] frame_mapping = {0: driveframe0, 1: driveframe1};

Reviewer 3: Oh, I see. This is another way of approaching this.

Author: Possible overextension of the language; the `set_attr` and `get_attr` seems like a legitimate alternative.

Reviewer 4: I like the get/set attr idea vs adding multiple container types to the language. I would also advocate for making it narrower, `getframe` and `setframe` that only work with frames and don't need to work for other types.

Reviewer 3: > getframe and setframe that only work with frames and don't need to work for other types.

This would certainly be easier and be less of a headache. The only other piece that comes to mind would be pulses (eg., applying a scaling to an Xp pulse to get an X90) / virtual channels.

Author: Left it `getframe` and `setframe` for now. I'm also unclear on where frequencies or calibrated phases would come from (e.g. undoing local `RZ`s from a 2Q gate).

>      map[int, frame] frame_mapping = {0: driveframe0, 1: driveframe1};

Reviewer: Neat

.. code-block:: javascript

   defcal prelude {
     frame frame_01 = Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0);
     frame frame_02 = Frame(1.0, 6e9, 0.0);
     ...
     map[int, list[frame]] frame_mapping = {0: [frame_01, frame_02], ...};
    }

   defcal access_frames $q {
     frame qframe_01 = frame_mapping[$q][0];
     frame qframe_12 = frame_mapping[$q][1];
   }

> Note that ``map`` and ``list`` are simple base containers and are not tied to the ``frame``

Reviewer: There have been discussion to add  `array` to OpenQASM--this could replace `list`. But seems like a good idea

Author: :fire: for now in place of `setframe` and `getframe`.

construction, they  simply make it easier to parametrize the access to these frames and could
be useful in mapping and/or collecting other OpenQASM types.

Frame manipulation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The (frequency, phase) tuple of a frame can be manipulated throughout program
by referencing ``.frequency``, and ``.phase``. Operations must be
appropriate for the respective type, ``float`` for frequency and ``angle`` for
phase. Again, the exact precision of these calculations is hardware specific.

Here's an example of manipulating the phase to calibrate an ``rz`` gate on a frame called
``driveframe``:

.. code-block:: javascript

   // Shift phase of the "drive" frame by pi/4, eg. an rz gate with angle -pi/4

>    driveframe.phase += pi/4;

Reviewer 3: What update time does this operation take place at?

Author: Since each `frame` is responsible for keeping its own time, the update will occur at the current time of the `driveframe`.

   // Define a calibration for the rz gate on all physical qubits

>    defcal rz(angle[20]:theta) %q {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   defcal rz(angle[20] theta) $q {
```

     driveframe.phase -= theta;
   }

Manipulating frames based on the state of other frames is also permitted:

.. code-block:: javascript

   // Swap phases between two frames
   const temp = frame1.phase;
   frame1.phase = frame2.phase;
   frame2.phase = temp;

Waveforms
---------

Waveforms are of type ``waveform`` and can either be:

- An array of complex samples which define the points for the waveform envelope
- An abstract mathematical function representing a waveform. This will later be
  materialized into a list of complex samples, either by the compiler or the hardware
  using the parameters provided to the pulse template.

A value of type ``waveform`` is retrieved by explicitly constructing the complex samples
or by calling one of the built-in waveform template functions. Note that each of these
functions takes a type ``length`` as a first argument, since waveforms need to have a definite
length. Using the hardware dependent ``dt`` unit is recommended, since the compiler may need to
down-sample a higher precision waveform to physically realize it.

.. code-block:: javascript

   // arbitrary complex samples

>    arb_waveform = [1+0*j, 0+1*j, 1/sqrt(2)+1/sqrt(2)*j];

Reviewer: Note: Will need to define array and complex types either in OpenQASM or specifically at the OpenPulse level. There have been discussion for both at the OpenQASM level

   // amp is waveform amplitude at center
   // center is the mean of waveform
   // sigma is the standard deviation of waveform

>    gaussian(length:l, complex[float[32]]:amp, length:center, length:sigma)

Reviewer: We could consider removing `center` and including a `shift` function for `waveform`'s (I think `shift` is in the signal proposal, but not included in the transformation ops here).

   // amp is waveform amplitude at center
   // center is the mean of waveform
   // sigma is the standard deviation of waveform
   sech(length:l, complex[float[32]]:amp, length:center, length:sigma)

   // amp is waveform amplitude at center
   // center is the mean of waveform
   // square_width is the width of the square waveform component
   // sigma is the standard deviation of waveform
   gaussian_square(length:l, complex[float[32]]:amp, length:center, length:square_width, length:sigma)

   // amp is waveform amplitude at center
   // center is the mean of waveform
   // sigma is the standard deviation of waveform
   // beta is the Y correction amplitude, see the DRAG paper
   drag(length:l, complex[float[32]]:amp, length:center, length:sigma, float[32]:beta)

>    // Define a constant waveform of length l

Reviewer: This should include an amplitude

   sine(l: length, complex[float[32]]:amp, float[32]: frequency, angle: phase)

We can manipulate the ``waveform`` types using the following signal processing functions to produce
new waveforms

- ``mix(wf1: waveform, wf2: waveform)`` -> waveform - Mix two input waveforms to produce a new waveform.
  This is equivalent to the product signal :math:`wf(t_i) = wf_1(t_i) \times wf_2(t_i)`
- ``sum(wf1: waveform, wf2: waveform)`` -> waveform - Sum two input waveforms to produce a new waveform.
- ``piecewise(wf0: waveform, wf1: waveform)`` -> waveform - Output waveform.
- ``offset(wf: waveform, amount: complex)`` -> waveform - Offset the input waveform by an amount.
- ``scale(wf: waveform, factor: complex)`` -> waveform - Scale the input waveform by a factor.
- ``conj(wf: waveform) -> waveform`` - Conjugate the input waveform.
- ``re(wf: waveform) -> waveform`` - Real component of input waveform.
- ``im(wf: waveform) -> waveform`` - Imaginary component of input waveform.
- ``abs(wf: waveform) -> waveform`` - Transform waveform as norm of input. waveform
- ``phase_shift(wf: waveform, ang: angle) -> waveform`` - Signal with relative phase, ang.

Play instruction
----------------

> Waveforms are scheduled using the ``play`` instruction. These instructions may

Reviewer: Should we note that it is illegal to use a `Frame` simultaneously across channels (aka it will invoke a compilation error)?

Author: Simultaneously in the sense of two `defcal` blocks scheduled simultaneously and making use of the same frame?

Reviewer 3: This is not possible. Consistency is always enforced by the relative ordering of instructions and the resulting dispatch resolution chain.

```
defcal x $0 {
    frame.phase += pi/2;
}

defcal x $1 {
    play frame, pulse
}

x $1;  // pulse happens first
x $0; // frame change happens second.
```

Reviewer: No, I mean invoking play on two different physical channels with the same `Frame`. Then they'd occur at the same time which would be an issue

Author: > No, I mean invoking play on two different physical channels with the same Frame. 

There wouldn't be an ambiguity (aside from sample rate issues) -- the time on the Frame would be advanced based on ordering of those two "play" instructions.

> only appear inside a ``defcal`` block!

Reviewer: Should we consider allowing `play` (and `capture`) to be done for a specified period of time? That way you can choose the samples you want without having to explicitly shift or clip waveforms.

Author: We _could_.

> Play instructions have two required parameters:

Reviewer 3: Is this 3 required arguments?

> Play instructions have two required parameters:

Reviewer: Believe this should be updated--there is now a third required parameter, ie the channel.

- a value of type ``waveform`` representing the waveform envelope
- the frame to use for the pulse
- the channel on which to play the pulse

.. code-block:: javascript

>    // Play a 3 sample pulse on qubit 0's "drive" frame

Reviewer: Update comment w/ `tx0` description

>    play(tx0, [1+0*j, 0+1*j, 1/sqrt(2)+1/sqrt(2)*j], driveframe);

Reviewer 3: Could we tie channels with frames in the form of virtual channels, eg., `vc chan = virtual(channel, frame)` from this point on a virtual channel is a frame+channel and all updates to the frame have a well-defined time.

Reviewer: I like this. Also could remove the need to copy frames if we then tracked time via the virtual channels.

>    // Play a gaussian on qubit 1's "drive" frame

Reviewer: Same comment on `tx0`

Channels are vendor-specific and device-specific. It is expected that vendors
of quantum hardware provide the appropriate channel names and qubit mappings
as configuration information to end users. Each channel may also have associated
static settings, such as local-oscillator frequencies, which do not vary
throughout program execution. Again it is expected that vendors of quantum
hardware provide a method for manipulating those static settings if appropriate.

There are two kinds of channels: transmit channels (sending input to a quantum

> device) and receive channels (reading output from a quantum device).

Reviewer: We should include the syntax for channels, in particular the channel accessor syntax.

Author: Added.

Interacting with channels directly is onerous and makes the pulse programs less
portable. The OpenPulse defcalgrammar does not directly work with channels and
instead works with abstract "frames" of reference, described below. A channel
is only used to specify the physical resource on which to play a pulse.

Frames
------

> When interacting with qubits, it turns out to be quite useful to keep track of a frame of reference,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When interacting with qubits, it is powerful to track of a frame of reference,
```

Author: Fixed.

> akin to the rotating frame of a Hamiltonian, throughout the execution of a program. These ``frame``
> types are responsible for two things

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
akin to the rotating frame of a Hamiltonian, throughout the execution of a program. Openpulse provides the ``frame`` type which is responsible for tracking two properties:
```

Author: Fixed.

- Tracking time appropriately so programs do not need to deal in absolute time or with the
  bookkeeping of advancing time in a sequence of pulses.
- Tracking phase by producing a complex value given an input time (i.e. via the mathematical
  relationship :math:`e^{i\left(2\pi f t + \theta\right)}`,  where `f` is frequency and
  :math:`\theta` is phase). One motivation for keeping track of phase is to allow pulses to be

>   defined in the rotating frame (i.e. without the carrier) with the effect being

Reviewer 2: What does "without the carrier" mean?

Author: 🔥

  an equivalent application in the lab frame (i.e. with the carrier supplied by the ``frame``).
  Another motivation is to more naturally implement a "virtual Z-gate", which does not require a
  physical pulse but rather shifts the phase of all future pulses on that frame.

The frame is composed of three parts:

1. A frequency ``frequency`` of type ``float``.
2. A phase ``phase`` of type ``angle``.
3. A time which is manipulated implicitly and cannot be modified other
   than through existing timing instructions like ``delay`` and ``barrier``. The time increment
   is determined by the channel on which the frame is played (see :ref:`Timing` section).

The ``frame`` type is a virtual resource and the exact precision of these parameters is
hardware specific. It is thus up to the compiler to choose how to implement the required
transformations to physical resources in hardware (e.g. mapping multiple frames to a
single NCO).

Frame Construction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Frames are purely virtual and can be constructed using the ``Frame`` command

Reviewer 2: Might not be worth repeating "virtual" as it is discussed in the paragraph just above

Author: :fire:

.. code-block:: javascript

>   frame driveframe = Frame(5e9, 0.0);

Reviewer: Can we add the function signature, ie `Frame(float[size] frequency, angle[size] phase)`?

Author: Added as a comment. Did you want a more explicit code block?

When instantiated, the frame time starts at 0. ``Frame``s can also be copied using the
``copy`` command

.. code-block:: javascript

  frame driveframe1 = Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0);
  frame driveframe2 = copy(driveframe1);
  driveframe2.phase = driveframe1.phase + pi/2;

This will generate a ::math:`pi/2` phase incremented copy of ``driveframe1`` (i.e. with

> the same frequency and time as ``driveframe1``) with the same time as `driveframe1`.

Reviewer 2: repeated "with the same time"

Author: Fixed.

Like other things in OpenQASM, a ``frame`` is locally scoped unless a ``prelude`` defcal is used
to instantiate frames in global scope.

.. code-block:: javascript

   defcal prelude {
     frame driveframe0 = Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0);
     frame driveframe1 = Frame(1.0, 6e9, 0.0);
    }

   defcal access_frames $q {
     frame driveframe2 = copy(driveframe1); // `driveframe1` globally scoped
   }

To allow for parameterized access to these globally defined frames, we can also define a ``map``.

.. code-block:: javascript

   defcal prelude {
     frame driveframe0 = Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0);
     frame driveframe1 = Frame(1.0, 6e9, 0.0);
     ...
     map[int, frame] frame_mapping = {0: driveframe0, 1: driveframe1};
    }

   defcal access_frames $q {
     frame driveframe2 = copy(driveframe0); // `driveframe0` globally scoped
     frame driveframe3 = frame_mapping[$q]; // access `driveframe0` or `driveframe1` by the integer label
   }

If there are multiple frames associated with a qubit, the map can be extended using a

> ``list``

Reviewer: Could likely also remove the `list` concept if we go w/ attributes.

Author: 🔥

   // Swap phases between two frames
   const temp = frame1.phase;
   frame1.phase = frame2.phase;
   frame2.phase = temp;

Waveforms
---------

Waveforms are of type ``waveform`` and can either be:

- An array of complex samples which define the points for the waveform envelope
- An abstract mathematical function representing a waveform. This will later be
  materialized into a list of complex samples, either by the compiler or the hardware
  using the parameters provided to the pulse template.

A value of type ``waveform`` is retrieved by explicitly constructing the complex samples
or by calling one of the built-in waveform template functions. Note that each of these
functions takes a type ``length`` as a first argument, since waveforms need to have a definite
length. Using the hardware dependent ``dt`` unit is recommended, since the compiler may need to
down-sample a higher precision waveform to physically realize it.

.. code-block:: javascript

   // arbitrary complex samples
   arb_waveform = [1+0*j, 0+1*j, 1/sqrt(2)+1/sqrt(2)*j];

   // amp is waveform amplitude at center
   // l is the overall length of the waveform
   // sigma is the standard deviation of waveform

>    gaussian(complex[float[32]]:amp, length:l, length:sigma)

Reviewer: Should these be `kernel` functions?

Author: Yes, added.

   // sigma is the standard deviation of waveform
   sech(complex[float[32]]:amp, length:l, length:sigma)

   // amp is waveform amplitude at center
   // l is the overall length of the waveform
   // square_width is the width of the square waveform component
   // sigma is the standard deviation of waveform
   gaussian_square(complex[float[32]]:amp, length:l, length:square_width, length:sigma)

   // amp is waveform amplitude at center
   // l is the overall length of the waveform
   // sigma is the standard deviation of waveform
   // beta is the Y correction amplitude, see the DRAG paper
   drag(complex[float[32]]:amp, length:l, length:sigma, float[32]:beta)

   // amp is waveform amplitude
   // l is the overall length of the waveform
   constant(complex[float[32]]:amp, length:l)

   // amp is waveform amplitude
   // l is the overall length of the waveform
   // frequency is the frequency of the waveform
   // phase is the phase of the waveform
   sine(complex[float[32]]:amp, length: l, float[32]: frequency, angle: phase)

We can manipulate the ``waveform`` types using the following signal processing functions to produce
new waveforms

> - ``mix(wf1: waveform, wf2: waveform)`` -> waveform - Mix two input waveforms to produce a new waveform.

Reviewer 4: mix and scale are the only uses I see in the examples, makes me wonder whether it's worth postponing adding some of these other ones

Reviewer 2: Because frames are cheap now we may not need it but I can see folks wanting `sum` and `piecewise`.

Reviewer 3: `phase` may be useful to produce a Y from an X pulse, but this could be equivalently realized with a frame.

Author: > phase may be useful to produce a Y from an X pulse, but this could be equivalently realized with a frame.

That's true, but since that phase is tracking this might still be useful. Or you may want to define a DRAG pulse as as sum of an X and a Y with some scaling.

  This is equivalent to the product signal :math:`wf(t_i) = wf_1(t_i) \times wf_2(t_i)`
- ``sum(wf1: waveform, wf2: waveform)`` -> waveform - Sum two input waveforms to produce a new waveform.
- ``piecewise(wf0: waveform, wf1: waveform)`` -> waveform - Output waveform.
- ``offset(wf: waveform, amount: complex)`` -> waveform - Offset the input waveform by an amount.
- ``scale(wf: waveform, factor: complex)`` -> waveform - Scale the input waveform by a factor.
- ``conj(wf: waveform) -> waveform`` - Conjugate the input waveform.
- ``re(wf: waveform) -> waveform`` - Real component of input waveform.
- ``im(wf: waveform) -> waveform`` - Imaginary component of input waveform.
- ``abs(wf: waveform) -> waveform`` - Transform waveform as norm of input. waveform

> - ``phase_shift(wf: waveform, ang: angle) -> waveform`` - Signal with relative phase, ang.

Reviewer 4: Why would I need this vs shifting phase on the frame?

Reviewer 2: If you want to sum phase shifted versions of a waveform you would need it.

> 

Reviewer: Might be nice to consider syntactic sugar like `*` for `mix`, `+` for `sum`, etc...

Play instruction
----------------

Waveforms are scheduled using the ``play`` instruction. These instructions may
only appear inside a ``defcal`` block!

> Play instructions have three required parameters:

Reviewer 2: suggest ordering the bullets in the same order that they're passed to `play`

Author: Fixed.

- a value of type ``waveform`` representing the waveform envelope
- the frame to use for the pulse
- the channel on which to play the pulse

.. code-block:: javascript

>    // Play a 3 sample pulse on the tx0 channel

Reviewer: I think adding the general signature would be helpful, ie `play(channel chan, waveform wfm, frame fr)`

Author: Added.

> Again it is up to the hardware vendor to determine the parameters and write a

Reviewer: On line 274, says "only required parameter is a `frame`". Should update to include the channel.

hardware and measurement methods. Like the play instruction, these instructions
may only appear inside a ``defcal`` block!

The only required parameters are the ``channel`` and the ``frame``.

The following are possible parameters that might be included:

> 

Reviewer 2: not changed here but typo below: "the measured IQ to distill"

Author: Fixed.

Timing
------

Each frame maintains its own "clock". When a pulse is played the clock for
that frame advances by the length of the pulse.

For frames, everything behaves analogous to qubits in the
`Delays <delays.html>`_ section of this specification. There are however some
small differences.

The ``delay`` instruction may take a frame instead of a qubit. The ``barrier``
instruction may also take a list of frames intead of a list of qubits and aligns the time
of the clocks given as arguments.

``defcal`` blocks have an implicit ``barrier`` on every frame that enters the block,
meaning that those clocks are guaranteed to be aligned at the start of the block.
These blocks also need to have a well-defined length, similar to the ``boxas`` block.

.. code-block:: javascript

   waveform p = ...; // some 100dt waveform

   defcal prelude {
     frame driveframe1 = Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0);
     frame driveframe2 = Frame(1.0, 6e9, 0.0);
   }

   defcal aligned_gates {
     // driveframe1 and driveframe2 used in this defcal, so clocks are aligned
     play(tx0, p, driveframe1);

>      delay[20dt] driveframe;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     delay[20dt] driveframe1;
```

     // Clocks now unaligned by 120dt, so we use a `barrier` to re-align
     barrier(driveframe1, driveframe2);
     // `driveframe2` will now play a pulse 120dt after `driveframe1` finishes playing
     play(tx0, p, driveframe2);
   }

Examples
--------

Cross-resonance gate
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

  defcal prelude {
     frame frame0 = Frame(1.0, 5e9, 0.0);
  }

>   defcal cross_resonance %0 %1 {

Reviewer: We've switched to using $q for physical qubits, as `%` refers to the modulo operator. See https://qiskit.github.io/openqasm/language/pulses.html

      // Initialize
      channel d0 = txch(%0, "drive");
      channel d1 = txch(%1, "drive");

>       waveform wf1 = gaussian_square(1., 1024dt, 32dt, 128dt);

Reviewer: Not a big deal, but I think these arguments (and their ordering) may differ from your definition given above of `gaussian_square`

Geometric gate
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

  defcal prelude {
      float[32] fq_01 = 5e9; // hardcode or pull from some function
      float[32] anharm = 300e6; // hardcode or pull from some function
      frame frame_01 = Frame(fq_01, 0);
      frame frame_12 = Frame(fq_01 + anharm, 0);
  }

  defcal geo_gate(angle[32]: theta) %0 {
      // theta: rotation angle (about z-axis) on Bloch sphere

      tx_channel dq = txch($q, “drive”);

      // Assume we have calibrated 0->1 pi pulses and 1->2 pi pulse
      // envelopes (no sideband)
      waveform X_01 = {...};
      waveform X_12 = {...};
      float[32] a = sin(theta/2);
      float[32] b = sqrt(1-a**2);

      // Double-tap
      play(dq, scale(a, X_01), frame_01);
      play(dq, scale(b, X_12), frame_12);
      play(dq, scale(a, X_01), frame_01);
      play(dq, scale(b, X_12), frame_12);
  }

Neutral atoms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this simple example, the signal chain is composed of two electro-optic modulators (EOM) and
an acousto-optic deflector (AOD). The EOMs put sidebands on the laser light while the AOD diffracts
the light in an amount proportional to the frequency of the RF drive. This example was chosen

> because it is similar in spirit to the work by Levine et al. except that phase control is exerted

Reviewer: Link for Levine et al.? I believe it was in the google doc

    eom_a_channel = txch(1, "eom_b");
    aod_channel = txch(0, "aod");

    // Define the Raman frames, which are detuned by an amount Δ from the  5S1/2 to 5P1/2 transition
    // and offset from each other by the qubit_freq
    raman_a_frame = Frame(Δ, 0.0)
    raman_b_frame = Frame(Δ-qubit_freq, 0.0)

    // Waveforms supplied to the Raman beams are just constant

    // Three copies of qubit freq to track phase of each qubit
    q1_frame = Frame(qubit_freq, 0)
    q2_frame = Frame(qubit_freq, 0)
    q3_frame = Frame(qubit_freq, 0)

    // Generic gaussian envelope
    waveform π_half_sig = gaussian(..., π_half_time, ...)

    // Waveforms ultimately supplied to the AODs. We mix our general Gaussian pulse with a sine wave to
    // put a sideband on the signal construction to target the qubit position while maintainig the
    // desired Rabi rate.
    q1_π_half_sig = mix(π_half_sig, sine(q1_π_half_amp, q1_pos_freq-qubit_freq, 0.0, π_half_time));
    q2_π_half_sig = mix(π_half_sig, sine(q2_π_half_amp, q2_pos_freq-qubit_freq, 0.0, π_half_time));
    q3_π_half_sig = mix(π_half_sig, sine(q3_π_half_amp, q3_pos_freq-qubit_freq, 0.0, π_half_time));

>     for τ in [0: T]:

Reviewer: Do we want loops within the `defcal`? You could make the `defcal` the pulse sequence within the loop

Author: Good question. I would say yes so long as they "have a definite length". Otherwise, I'm wondering where the setup information for the `q#_π_half_sig` would go in this example.  Do we allow for nested `defcal` blocks?

Reviewer: yeah that's a fair point. It could be made global, but that might be too much. I think this is fine

        // Simultaneous π/2 pulses
        play(eom_a_channel, constant(raman_a_amp, π_half_time) , raman_a_frame);
        play(eom_b_channel, constant(raman_b_amp, π_half_time) , raman_b_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q1_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q2_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q3_frame);

        // Time delay all
        delay(.*, τ/2)

        // π pulse on qubit 1 only -- composed of two π/2 pulses
        for _ in [0:1]:
            play(eom_a_channel, constant(raman_a_amp, π_half_time) , raman_a_frame);
            play(eom_b_channel, constant(raman_b_amp, π_half_time) , raman_b_frame);
            play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q1_frame);

        // Fence all then time delay

>         fence(.*)

Reviewer: `fence`->`barrier`

        q1_frame.phase += tppi_1 * τ
        q1_frame.phase += tppi_2 * τ
        q1_frame.phase += tppi_3 * τ

        // Simultaneous π/2 pulses
        play(eom_a_channel, constant(raman_a_amp, π_half_time) , raman_a_frame);
        play(eom_b_channel, constant(raman_b_amp, π_half_time) , raman_b_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q1_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q2_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q3_frame);
  }

Multiplexed readout and capture
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this example, we want to perform readout and capture of a pair of qubits, but mediated by a
single physical tx and rx channel. The example is for just two qubits, but works the same for
many (just adding more frames, waveforms, plays, and captures).

.. code-block:: javascript

  defcal multiplexed_readout_and_capture() $0 $1

    // the tx/rx channel is the same for $0 and $1
    tx_channel ro_tx = txch($0, "readout");
    rx_channel ro_rx = rxch($0, "readout");

    // readout frames of different frequencies
    q0_frame = Frame(q0_ro_freq, 0); // time 0
    q1_frame = Frame(q1_ro_freq, 0); // time 0

    // flat-top readout waveforms

>     waveform q0_ro_wf = constant(amplitude=0.1, time=...);

Reviewer: `constant` should have a `length`, not `time` I would think?

    waveform q1_ro_wf = constant(amplitude=0.2, time=...);

    // multiplexed readout
    play(ro_tx, q0_ro_wf, q0_frame);
    play(ro_tx, q1_ro_wf, q1_frame);

    // simple boxcar kernel
    waveform ro_kernel = constant(amplitude=1, time=...);

    // multiplexed capture
    complex[32] q0_iqs = capture(ro_rx, q0_frame, ro_kernel);
    complex[32] q1_iqs = capture(ro_rx, q1_frame, ro_kernel);

Sample rate collisions
-----------------------

Incommensurate Rates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Since the frame can be played on multiple channels, there may be an issue with sample rates.

Reviewer: At the top, I believe you said `dt` is tied to the frame. But it seems here it's tied to the channel (which also certainly makes sense...)?

Timing
------

Each frame maintains its own "clock". When a pulse is played the clock for
that frame advances by the length of the pulse.

For frames, everything behaves analogous to qubits in the
`Delays <delays.html>`_ section of this specification. There are however some
small differences.

The ``delay`` instruction may take a frame instead of a qubit. The ``barrier``

> instruction may also take a list of frames intead of a list of qubits and aligns the time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instruction may also take a list of frames instead of a list of qubits and aligns the time
```

Author: Fixed.

of the clocks given as arguments.

``defcal`` blocks have an implicit ``barrier`` on every frame that enters the block,
meaning that those clocks are guaranteed to be aligned at the start of the block.

> These blocks also need to have a well-defined length, similar to the ``boxas`` block.

Reviewer: A `barrier_all` instruction across all frames could be useful.

Author: I've changed it to no argument delaying all frames in scope as per Steven's [comment](https://github.com/stevenheidel/openqasm/pull/2/files?file-filters%5B%5D=.rst#r621802362).

    // Three copies of qubit freq to track phase of each qubit
    q1_frame = Frame(qubit_freq, 0)
    q2_frame = Frame(qubit_freq, 0)
    q3_frame = Frame(qubit_freq, 0)

    // Generic gaussian envelope
    waveform π_half_sig = gaussian(..., π_half_time, ...)

    // Waveforms ultimately supplied to the AODs. We mix our general Gaussian pulse with a sine wave to
    // put a sideband on the signal construction to target the qubit position while maintainig the
    // desired Rabi rate.
    q1_π_half_sig = mix(π_half_sig, sine(q1_π_half_amp, q1_pos_freq-qubit_freq, 0.0, π_half_time));
    q2_π_half_sig = mix(π_half_sig, sine(q2_π_half_amp, q2_pos_freq-qubit_freq, 0.0, π_half_time));
    q3_π_half_sig = mix(π_half_sig, sine(q3_π_half_amp, q3_pos_freq-qubit_freq, 0.0, π_half_time));

    for τ in [0: T]:
        // Simultaneous π/2 pulses
        play(eom_a_channel, constant(raman_a_amp, π_half_time) , raman_a_frame);
        play(eom_b_channel, constant(raman_b_amp, π_half_time) , raman_b_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q1_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q2_frame);
        play(aod_channel, q1_π_half_sig, q3_frame);

        // Time delay all

>         delay(.*, τ/2)

Reviewer 4: Rather than introducing new syntax, does it make sense for a no argument delay/barrier to delay all the frames in scope? That's how the spec is currently written for qubits.

Author: Perfect. Fixed.

Sample rate collisions
-----------------------

Incommensurate Rates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since the frame can be played on multiple channels, there may be an issue with sample rates.
For example,

.. code-block:: javascript

  defcal incommensurate_rates_interval() $q
    tx0 = txch(0, "tx0"); # sample per 1 ns
    tx1 = txch(1, "tx1"); # sample per 2 ns

    waveform wf = gaussian_square(0.1, 13ns, ...);

    play(tx0, wf, driveframe);
    // now driveframe.time is at 13ns
    play(tx1, wf, driveframe); // does not support 13 ns -- either 12ns or 14 ns
  }

The implementation of this behavior is up to the vendor.

Incommensurate Lengths
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the samples are defined dt, then playing the same waveform on two different channels
produces

.. code-block:: javascript

  defcal incommensurate_lengths() $q
    tx0 = txch(0, "tx0"); # sample per 1 ns
    tx1 = txch(1, "tx1"); # sample per 2 ns

    waveform wf = gaussian_square(0.1, 12dt, ...); // this means different lengths to different channels

    play(tx0, wf, driveframe);
    // now driveframe.time is at 12ns
    play(tx1, wf, driveframe);
    // now driveframe.time is at 36ns
  }

> This is considered well-defined behavior.

Reviewer: We might also wish to add the spectroscopy example from the signal proposal
